We're in Newton, right?
And it's raining hard.
And it's a pleasure to meet you, sir.
So we're just entering the conversation.
In fact, you were telling me that you have about 4,000 books in the house.
I may not use this for my column, but I might use it for my new book.
You never know.
Yeah, I have 4,000 books, and I was always troubled that it was such a frustration to lay my hand on a book I wanted to quote or read or look at, and I would spend hours sometimes and get angry at my wife.
marriage is a way of acquiring a scapegoat I always blame my wife and inevitably I'm the one who's a flaw so in fact I decided to take the bull by the horn proverbially and spent several months numbering every book on the back and putting a runa letter
What did you call it?
A room letter.
A letter for each room.
Oh, I get it.
Okay.
So if it's in the library itself... So you call it a room letter?
Is that your room letter?
No, no, no.
I put a mail and a number.
One, two, three.
And I number them in sequence without moving them at all.
My wife says, that's crazy.
She said, I'll take all the poetry book, all the travel book, all the English, French, whatever.
No way.
I left it in place.
Then I...
That's very interesting.
Let the computer go through the horrendous ordeal of filing and doing that.
And I put in a special program, FileMaker Pro.
And then there were several discoveries.
One, that 500 of the books were gifts.
300 of them from authors.
Most of them my patients.
And they're such a treasure.
Oh, yeah, yes, yes, yes.
And they go from Gabriel Marquez to Alan Dershowitz to Ken Galbraith, etc., to Pauline Rothschild who wrote the only book she ever wrote.
Did you treat Garcia Marquez?
No, I didn't treat him, but he was a close friend.
And certainly I wanted to ask you about your patience, but that's quite a resident name, certainly, in my business.
And Marcus gave me, and it has a gorgeous inscription on it, with an inkwell, with a pen.
Wow.
Is it 100 Years of Solitude?
100 Years of Solitude.
Oh, my goodness.
First edition?
100 Years of Solitude, yes.
Wow.
So, in fact, but the other thing that really disquieted me, you know, I'm acquiring books, presumably to read, but only 15% of them.
How did you determine this?
Well, I entered the computer, one of the files, I made up a little program, whether I've read the book or not.
So I put an R if I read it.
So you say R and all the books that you've read, and it's only 15%.
Wow.
Do you hope to do the other 85 before your time is... Before I die.
I don't think so.
But the other thing that was interesting is that I had 60 books in duplicate.
Ah.
60 books in duplicate.
That's a lot, actually.
A few in triplicate.
Because I bought them twice, not remembering that I bought them once.
So now I've got a new...
Well, I would go into a bookstore, and I see a pile of books being sold, and the book is so attractive, and I pick it up, but I had it.
So as a remainder time, I can't imagine that you'd buy a brand new book.
No, sometimes it was a brand new book.
Hey, wait a minute.
The mind does not retain all the consumer trinkets one acquired.
See, I love books, particularly second-hand books.
My favorite books in the world are second-hand bookstores.
And I will buy multiple copies a book if it's for $2 or $3.
I would certainly know if I paid $35 or $40 for a book.
Well, but I had a patient who loved books with such a passion like nobody else.
His name was Leonard Boudin.
He was a great lawyer, one of the great in America.
He argued more cases before the Supreme Court than most.
He was a civil rights attorney.
The Ellsberg case.
the one he invented, actually.
And I watched him.
He was my patient.
So much of the strategy was right here in this house.
And he loved books.
I mean, the moment he walked by a book, forget it.
He got lost in it.
He'd almost pick up second-hand books.
He'd come with power.
I mean, he was a ravenous reader, very rapid.
So when I looked through my computer, Leonard died a few years ago.
I looked
Leonard.
30 books he gave me.
Wow.
Nobody else comes close.
Now, these are not books.
These are books.
So you also put a spot in your file for a resource.
Yeah.
Very simple.
Oh, yeah, of course.
But I'm just... Yeah, I have a source.
But I'm interested in the categories.
I have a category.
Categories is number.
Number one.
Okay.
Author.
Right.
Title.
Subject matter.
Subject.
Country.
Country is interesting.
Yeah, because I had so many on China, USA, published in those countries.
Australia, whatnot.
Then I will have a gift or something.
Source.
Source or something.
So gift, purchase, whatever.
Yeah, something.
I put a letter I have identified.
And whether it was inscribed.
yes no that's all and then red red not red red R I put it that's all there's a gentleman I interviewed in Chicago for my new book my new book is going to be about book culture on the eve of the new millennium and I don't want to talk about this while the tape is on because I'll scream at myself if I have to transcribe myself talking but it's going to be a very interesting book yeah I bet
I'm going to get your book and read it.
I think you like it.
If you like books, it's about the passion for books over 25 centuries.
I trace book passion.
I start in Alexandria with the Greeks.
Oh, the marvelous library that was destroyed in Alexandria.
Well, I write about that at some length.
What I tried to do is the historical section of my book.
The first psychosomaticist.
Galen was.
Galen.
Yeah, you mentioned him in this book.
But he's a psychosomaticist in this respect.
There was a young girl who came who was complaining of severe palpitation.
She was young and pretty, and he was by that time feeling her pulse.
And she didn't have her pulse.
It was quite regular then.
And he tried to figure out what caused it.
So he had a suspicion that it was an infatuation with one of the great actors in Rome at that time.
All the girls seemed to go gaga over it.
So he mentioned the name, whatever, and he describes how a pulse took off like a flight of birds.
And then, that was interesting.
The next day, when she came back, he mentioned someone else, and her pulse became smooth as the Uranian sea and a quiet submarine.
That's his description?
Well, yes, something like that.
But his description was, you see, he ran a control.
Because initially, he mentioned a name, and the pulse took off, but maybe he's talking to it.
So he had to come back, and he mentioned some neutral subject, and nothing happened.
Oh, it's like a control.
So to me, it was fascinating that... He understood the pulse and all that?
Oh, yeah.
The pulse was well understood by Yale.
Isn't that amazing?
Yeah.
I mean, I know that these are the earliest positions.
I mean, look, for example, the carotida artery.
Okay?
Why is it called carotida artery?
Carotidos, from the Greek, means sleep.
Now, why would this be the artery of sleep?
Because in the carotida artery, it's a little bulb, and if you press it, you induce a stoppage of the heart.
So you go to sleep.
Carotid artery, the artery of sleep.
So they understood this.
They understood it.
They must have.
Why would they name this the artery of sleep?
Now, we know there's a carotid bulb, and if you press it, you go across.
That's right.
And it's such a specific name, so it can't be chanced.
So they knew a lot.
They knew a lot.
I'm Greek, so I agree.
Actually, I did a lot of Greek studies in college.
You asked if I read your book.
These are my notes from your book here.
Yeah.
Go ahead.
I'm sorry.
So, in fact, the writing of the book was a long labor, ten years in gathering.
It began with my sitting down at the end of a long day.
The experiences were so rich that I wanted somehow to retain a hold of them, so I dictate about the experience of this or that patient.
It grew like topsy into a huge file.
Really?
of megabytes to megabytes.
So you did it on a computer?
Yeah.
And no, I would dictate.
You would dictate, but then— My secretary would type it in the computer.
Oh, so you had one.
Yeah, I had a play of labor.
I transcribed all my own tapes.
Yeah, well, so in fact, it became—and then about three years ago,
We have a newsletter, and I take out a story.
Meaning your family?
No, my group, the Laung cardiovascular group.
We have a newsletter, extraordinarily popular, and in every newsletter, it comes out three times a year, I put in one of these vignettes, one of these stories, and patients would, oh, I love your stories, I love your stories.
So I decided to write stories, but then I
I don't want to tell tales.
I want to address major issues and utilize the vignettes as the infrastructural support.
And that comes from a tradition of medicine, where the case presentation.
You learn by presenting a case.
You learn... By presenting a case, namely a patient.
But presenting to your colleagues.
Presenting to your colleagues, this 28-year-old young woman who... I understand, but I believe you say presenting.
Presenting means teaching, talking, sharing an experience.
So this case presentation is natural to me because I taught medicine at Harvard for 40 years or so.
So it was the way...
And also, I realized that when you learn facts, they're transient, they're ephemeral.
But if you hear a good story, it lasts.
And a great teacher knows how to embellish significant facts around the story.
May I just interject something?
The reason my book is so popular is that's precisely what I do.
I tell...
I want to talk about certain issues, but I do it in the context of great stories.
Well, that's what this book... And that's what I was noting here.
These stories, these stories, look at these stories.
You know how many there are?
There are 60 stories.
Well, I didn't count.
I counted 60 stories.
60, yeah.
And... Yeah, well, let's continue with that, if you don't mind.
So the aim of the book really was addressing a big issue.
And the big issue was a crisis in medicine.
And the crisis in medicine, the way it is perceived, is largely an economic one.
The cost at runaway... Do you agree with this, by the way?
Do I agree with it?
Yes, in part I do.
There is a cost runaway.
I mean, 14% of our gross national product is going to healthcare, a trillion dollar industry.
And it's related to...
the burgeoning technology, burgeoning hospital costs, greed of many sectors of the health community.
And I believe that the crisis is of different construction.
My view is the crisis that medicine has lost its way, if not its soul, essentially.
That medicine was a profound bonding between the patient and the physician.
a bonding that implicit was a contract.
And that social contract was something that gave doctors enormous power.
What profession has the right to be judge, jury, prosecuting attorney, and executioner all in one?
What's the doctor?
And does a doctor over the ages have a question when his patients die?
No, never.
No other person had that
No other sector of society had that awesome responsibility and trust.
And that has now dissipated in my lifetime.
Because when I graduated medical school, medicine was an apogee of distinction.
I think it still is.
I disagree with you on that.
Well, you know, I don't agree with you.
So we have a sharp disagreement.
I still believe that when you're in need, personally...
Oh, but that's a different issue.
The trust you invest in your doctor is total.
That's a different issue.
If you ask the ordinary person about trusting doctors, they will be very negative.
But if you ask the individual about his or her own doctor, they'll be extraordinarily trusting.
Okay.
There's enormous disenchantment that has been described in the medical literature of the last decade or more.
And it's certainly not because of the economic factors which you just outlined either.
It has to go much deeper than that.
And the curious thing is that this is occurring at a time when medicine is more successful than ever before.
Yesterday.
Successful.
You don't mind my interrupting every time.
No, please do.
I don't want it to be a soliloquy.
The point is successful.
For example, yesterday, New England Cable News interviewed me, and they wanted a patient.
And the patient who walked in was a patient who just six weeks before had a heart transplant.
He was dying.
He would have been dead, but he had a heart transplant.
He was alive and well and boisterous.
They're still excited from the miracle.
This is over at the Brigham?
No, in my office, in our group.
So do you do heart transplants?
No, we do it at the Brigham.
My mother-in-law was on a waiting list and died waiting three years ago at the Brigham.
It was terrible.
So while medicine is able to do so much that borders on the miraculous,
There's a deep dissatisfaction.
If you look at opinion polls, time and time again, they'll point that there's a dissatisfaction with the health care people receive, the long waiting, the shuttling to experts, the assault by technology, the lack of caring, the words that maimed that I have a whole chapter on.
I mean,
You have a time bomb in your chest.
You know how many times I've heard it?
Hundreds of times.
Where a patient comes in, my doctor told me I have a time bomb in my chest or a widowmaker in your heart.
It's a miracle you're alive, you know.
You may drop in there.
Well, they do have to get the attention, too, don't they?
Well, whatever it is, these woods, if you put a stiletto between somebody's ribs, you wouldn't do as much damage as these woods.
Because years later, I still am trying to heal up a person from the words of the, you know, the stupid words, the unthinking words of the doctor.
How can doctors are supposed to be attentive to the persona of a human being, be so indifferent, talking over a bed?
Look, I'll give you one example.
I'm making rounds, and the patient is doing well.
The day before I come in, everything is going bad.
And he's crying.
He says, I'm dying.
I said, why are you dying?
Well, he says, the intern said I had an acute myocardial infarction.
The resident said I had a coronary thrombosis.
The chief says I had a serious heart attack.
And when I asked the nurse what the hell was going on, she said, you better not ask.
You know.
So he thought, you know, Woods, a woman has cancer.
She knows she has cancer.
She knows she has metastases.
It was hysterical.
And the nurse walked in to talk to her.
What's going on?
She says, well, I know I had cancer.
I know I had metastases.
But this new doctor...
said that I also had an oncotic disease.
What's the word?
Well, oncotic is cancer, another medical word for cancer.
She thought she couldn't take it anymore.
How do you spell that?
Oncology.
Yeah, oncotic disease.
Words are extraordinarily powerful.
The most powerful medication that a doctor has, the most powerful tool he has is this word.
The power of words is extraordinary.
It's hard for a person in American culture who's sort of mesmerized by technology and all this miracle to realize that ultimately it is words that heal.
Well, and the reverse of that is that words can also, as you say, name and perhaps even...
I start out with an extraordinary experience.
Which can kill, actually.
I start out with an extraordinary experience where this was in 1950.
I just began to work with Sam Levine, who's a great cardiologist, and he said to this woman who was a librarian who had no reason to die, he was harassed that day to a lot of visitors from abroad, and he walks in and he says, I want to show you a case of T.S.,
And he walked out.
T.S.
is tricuspid stenosis, narrowing of the tricuspid valve.
And he walked out, and she now was in pulmonary edema, which never happens in T.S.
And she died that day.
And I describe in the book the shock and the horror.
I felt that like a hex in New Zealand, Australia...
a hex, you know, pointing the bone, and then they die.
And I've seen that over and over and over again, the power woods to kill, as you say.
You know, it fascinated me, this story you tell about the Hindu physician.
Oh, yes.
Now, where did you find that?
I found it in the Archives of Neurology of 1934.
So that happened this century then?
Yes.
And the poor guy died of fright, apparently.
It was a spare description.
Very spare.
And I wish they wrote more about it.
Well, I wonder, just to take it to a hypothetical, I mean, there's a moral thing.
I wonder, you know, if he hadn't died, what would they have done then?
They would have hanged him.
The doctor would have been fired as a prison doctor.
But was the object of that...
experiment to see if he died?
Yeah.
Not to see what the blood—just to see if the total certainty that I'm being bled to death is sufficient to cause him to die, either by a heart attack or—did he say what the cause of death was, by the way?
No.
You see, it was a little primitive in the sense that it—the what for cardiogram, which we did.
fascinating to see what is the process by which that is induced.
I mean, there are any number of possibilities.
It could have been arrhythmia with cessation of the heartbeat, cessation of the sinus node, AV conduction, ventricular basement.
It could have been a very rapid heart from fear, so rapid that the heart kills itself.
Or it could have been a release of potassium that poisons the heart.
Could have been any of a number of things, but he didn't do that.
Oh, it was proved that it would happen, but then to take it to that one step further.
I love these little stories.
I mean, that's really the book I have to say.
Would you say this is, to go off on just a little bit of a track here, is a lot of this a product of your own reading and your own
voracious appetite for knowledge.
Well, yes, it is.
And if I wasn't literate, literate, I wouldn't have written this type of book, clearly.
But the important thing are not the stories.
The important thing is the point.
It makes any number of points.
For example, that medicine is a science.
That's a big fake.
You say it's an art.
Yes.
No, medicine cannot do without science.
Without science, it's sheer do-gooderism, charlatanry, your kind neighbor, you know, stroking your brow.
But medicine has an essential core of science, and hopefully that will grow.
It has to grow.
But you also call it an inexact science.
It's inexact because, you see, much of medical knowledge
that involves people, is epidemiologic.
That is, a thousand people framing him.
Three thousand people in Sedona, Arizona or something, which have been studied over time.
But where do you fit in in that Gaussian distribution?
Where are you on that curve?
Are you in the center or on the right or left?
If you're on the extreme right, whatever is right for the middle is not applicable to you.
How does the doctor know?
The doctor never does.
There's no way to know.
And if you take even the biggest study imaginable, 10,000 people study for high blood pressure.
Okay, you pose a question.
Well, half are women.
So you have 5,000.
Half are...
under the age of 50.
If you go to the age of 60 to 70, only 1,000.
But if you had diabetics, you're reduced to 100.
And if you had diabetics who have gout, you're reduced to 10.
And he doesn't tell you about these 10.
It's impossible.
So the doctor really never knows.
He knows, and the layperson has such a mythology.
I mean, I meet some of the most intelligent people, and when I listen to them talk about medicine, it's like idiots.
Absolute idiots.
I mean, all this hype about the doctors, the scientists, and as a result, the doctor starts pretending to be God, because there's a little scientist that knows all the answers, and everything is answerable, that's only to God, you know.
And the patients
has therefore enormous unrealistic expectations and extraordinary disappointments when you get really sick for which there is no cure.
And one of the best chapters here, I think, is the one on death and dying.
Death and dying.
Kirkus Review just came out.
It says that death and dying is superb in every doctor.
It's a must for every doctor.
Did you read Shep Mullen's book on how he died?
Yes.
I didn't like it.
Really?
Why is that?
I didn't like it because, firstly, I loved his writing.
He's a consummately skilled writer.
He's a very cultured human being.
But I didn't like his writing because he didn't address the centrality that dying is a cultural factor.
The horror of dying is what we have imposed on people.
We, the medical profession, largely.
Because we have learned how to extend the process of dying interminably.
And he doesn't address that.
Only peripherally.
When he talks about his own brother who went through hell, he suddenly does a mini critique of his professional peers.
My God, I watched, you know, my specialty is sudden death.
Sudden coronary death.
I put that thing on the map.
I worked hard in the 1960s.
That got me to the Russians, really, in a strange way.
I want to talk about that Nobel Prize project, too, as well.
Yeah, I'll talk about that.
But, you see, Sir Newland... Is there such a thing as sudden death in a... Yes.
Because I've always maintained as a journalist that everybody dies at the same speed as everybody else, looking at it in terms of words.
When they say somebody died suddenly,
Maybe they died unexpectedly.
Oh, no, no, no.
Sudden death is instantaneous death.
I mean, one is, well, one minute, you're sitting, and you're dead.
That's sudden death.
It's instantaneous.
So there is such a thing as sudden death.
I've always maintained that there isn't.
No, no, there is.
I'm obviously wrong.
There is, there is, there is.
But with this sudden, with respect to... In a sense, in a sense...
In a sense, you're right.
If death is a change of state, that change of state is abrupt at one second in time, sometimes, right?
But sudden death is different.
It's not a gradual progression.
It's an abrupt tectonic plate movement.
One is well, and one is dead.
Like these basketball players out there.
That is sudden death.
Imperfect physical shape.
They're young.
That is my specialty, actually.
I'll go back to the Russians now, if I may.
In 1959, I began to be preoccupied with sudden death.
Because it was clear to me that large numbers of my patients were disappearing.
And because I dealt with coronary artery disease and tried to search the literature.
Yes, there was a mention of sudden death, but there was no hard facts or hard figures.
Was it environmental, do you think?
Well, it was a number of factors.
But the mechanism of sudden death was clear to me.
It was clear to me because I invented the defibrillator.
I didn't know that, by the way.
Yeah, well, the defibrillator and the cardioverter, which straightens out heart rhythms, introduced the most magical drug, lidocaine, which was a dental anesthetic, and I introduced it as a heart drug, so it smooths out heart rhythm.
Well, and I realized that sudden death was due to arrhythmia of the heart.
The heart catapulted.
into a very rapid rate, and it cannot sustain mechanical contraction to follow the electrical activity.
As a result, brain circulation stops instantly, coronary flow ceases, and one is dead.
Now, I tried very much to put this on the agenda of American medicine.
It wouldn't sail.
And in a large measure, the book sort of... Sail, was that the word?
S-A-I-O or sell?
Sell.
Okay.
Sail, you could say sail.
It's pretty good too, yeah.
It wouldn't sail.
I don't know which word it was when it comes to transcriptions.
But so in part it's because the culture of medicine is shaped by doctors in their academe.
But they never saw Sunday.
It never arrived in the hospital.
It would arrive in the emergency ward, dead on arrival, and go to the morgue.
The professor who makes rounds and sits in his office never saw that.
It wasn't this patient.
So it wasn't part of our culture.
The ordinary doctors saw it.
You were alerted to it by... I was alerted to because my preoccupation was the arrhythmias of the heart.
And having worked and developed the defibrillator, I said, hey, the sudden death must be this, what I'm seeing and curing.
Okay?
And I couldn't get the first base of interest.
So at that point— How can you cure sudden death?
Well, I mean, you can reverse it.
But you have to predict it.
Well, no.
No, no, no.
Somebody has a cardiac arrest.
Right.
and the heart is fluttering like that 500 times a minute, okay?
And the patient is not breathing, no blood flow, and if you leave that person be for three to five minutes, it's over, okay?
At that point, if you shock the heart with the defibrillator, you can restore normal beef.
So in fact, you can talk, actually not correct to say sudden death, because they haven't yet died, but they've had a cardiac arrest,
which inexorably leads precipitously, very rapidly, that is in minutes, to irreversibility.
So really this has to happen in a controlled setting.
Well, no, it doesn't.
If you saw the New York Times just this week, the FDA just approved many defibrillators that firemen and rescue squads will all have, which they weren't permitted because the medical profession opposed it for bad reasons.
So CPR basically is worthless in situations like this.
Is that right?
No, it's very worthwhile.
Is it?
Of course it's worthwhile.
Because CPR permits maintaining life until you get to a machine that straightens out heart rhythm.
But now they'll bring the machine to the patient.
So CPR will be, many lives will be saved.
I've urged that to look 40 years.
Not quite 40, 30.
A long time.
Long time.
But then I couldn't get any place.
So at that point in 1964, I think 63, 64, Van Klybren, the great pianist, won the Tchaikovsky competition in Moscow.
And the United States went gaga.
Aro!
I mean, the Tchaikovsky competition was Soviet, rigged by the Soviets for the Soviets.
Never did anybody.
But this was under Khrushchev, the Thor.
He wanted to get a better relation with Americans.
And they permitted the best guy to win.
And Van Klagen won.
I remember that.
And it gave me an idea.
Supposing I perform in Moscow, and the Russians by sudden death is a big issue.
The United States will then immediately erase not to want them to claim priority in a death that at that time claimed a human life every 60 seconds.
Wow.
One minute around the clock died.
There were 500,000 Americans dying suddenly.
Americans?
Americans.
Half a million a year.
Larger mortality than cancer at the time.
Wow.
And nobody knew about it.
Nobody paid attention.
You talk of the science of medicine.
So what were they saying?
How were they explaining all these deaths?
They were saying, well, it's
Somebody had a massive heart attack and died.
It's an act of God.
Wow.
And of course these were people of all ages.
Right, right.
You see, when you look at the history of medicine very carefully, you have enormous, your admiration increases, but your criticism, Tiger, also rise.
This is a human enterprise, faulty, full of fatuous hypotheses,
full of rotors, full of nonsense.
Look how many patients have been maimed by radical mastectomies, freezing stomachs, bloodletting, x-rays to various parts of the body that were unwarranted.
I have a patient that is dying.
Thyroid was x-rayed.
Little kids who had x-rays here, there, and young.
I mean, hey, this was part of medicine.
You know, they used to resect the colon for rheumatoid arthritis in the 20s.
Why?
Because their theory was that poisonous waste from the colon where the fecal stream runs, cumulate and get into the bloodstream and cause all the arthritic pains and whatnot.
So they removed colons.
How many thousands of people were killed?
Nobody talks about that.
Hmm.
And do you think that's not going on now with modern scientific method?
Of course it is.
Because when I talk about you, I don't mean you personally.
But that simplistic notion, medicine is a science.
Medicine ain't no science.
The moment you say that and talk truthfully about what medicine is, I have reverence for science.
I love science.
I think the greatest development in human thinking is science.
The greatest product of the Enlightenment is science.
Nothing like it.
I mean, the way to look at reality objectively and be able to predict outcomes and be able to get to know more and more and more.
So I have enormous respect for science, yet medicine ain't no science.
It partakes of much of science.
It must have more science than it ain't science.
So, well, the long and the short of it.
In 1966, in New Delhi, India, the World Congress of Cardiologists, I bumped into a Russian Soviet doctor who spoke a broken English.
His name was Chazov.
And he became very famous.
How do you spell?
C-H-A-Z-O-V.
And he was a young and up-and-coming head of cardiology in Russia.
And he was the doctor of readiness.
and later Andropov, and later Chernin, because the poor guy had bad luck with patients.
And he's now the doctor of Yeltsin.
Yeltsin is now in his institute, the Chazov Institute.
So what are they going to do?
Do the surgery there?
Well, in any case, so I said to Chazov, do you know about sudden death?
No, he didn't.
I said, why don't you invite me to Moscow, and I'll talk about it and teach you.
So in 1968, he invited me.
I came to Moscow and addressed 800 doctors.
And the result was one big yawn.
Nobody is interested.
I said, why aren't they interested?
All sudden death is an American disease.
It's a capitalist disease.
Because you guys are so competitive.
You're always racing for more money.
We Soviets are relaxed.
We don't die like this.
Well, in 1972, I got a call from the Kremlin, and that point was the Nixon-Grezhnev Accord, which permitted the Russians to call consultants from this country.
And I got an emergency call from the Soviet Union and from the White House to go to Moscow to see somebody in the Kremlin.
And that person in the Kremlin had kidney disease and was dying from kidney failure.
And I said, boy, these Russians are more backward than I thought.
Why would they call a cardiologist and knows little or nothing about kidney disease?
Well, the next day, once I gave my verdict, you know.
Did you go?
Yeah, I went.
So the next day, meaning the next day in Moscow?
The next day in Moscow, when I was wondering what the hell I was doing there,
A group of Russian doctors came and say, tomorrow you'll go with us to the Ministry of Health.
We want to discuss sudden death.
I say, sudden death?
I thought it didn't exist in the Soviet Union.
No, no, no.
It's the leading cause of fatality in the Soviet Union.
With all the smoking and all the fat, we have so much coronary disease, it's worse than in the United States.
So we began collaboration at that point.
And the United States government, the National Institute of Health, had a joint program on collaboration in cardiovascular disease, of which sudden death became a special topic, and I headed up that.
And Chaza was the counterpart heading up the cardiovascular program, and we became very close friends.
And when in 1979 I wrote him a letter saying that
The way we're going to die is not through sudden coronary, but sudden nuclear death.
He agreed, and we met.
And then the long story, we began to collaborate and founded this movement, the International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War.
Which members?
How many members now?
About 200,000.
Wow.
In 1981, and four years later, we both were receiving a Nobel Peace Prize on behalf of the organization which we both founded.
Pretty spectacular.
Isn't it spectacular?
From sudden death and asking him to invite me to Moscow and going to Moscow and hitting a strikeout and then ending up in this bizarre fashion, a home run.
A grand slam.
Yeah.
That's amazing.
But I don't tell that story in the book.
Well, it's not.
The book's about something else.
Yeah.
Who's your reader for this book?
Do you have an idea of who you're writing it for?
Everybody.
Every educated human being.
Why?
Firstly, it has to go to the public.
Why the public?
Because I'm persuaded that in fact, unless the public understands what medicine is all about,
and insist that doctoring go back to first beginnings.
And it's possible.
There will be no good medicine in this country.
And what we are losing is an enormous value.
You're seeing all over the deprofessionalization of medicine.
Because if the doctor is merely a technician, the doctor is replaceable.
Remember that.
You can train up technicians who will be perfect even in surgery.
Perfect.
Better than the best.
Technically.
Because when I was trained at Johns Hopkins Medical School, the best surgeon in the place was a black fellow who was a high school dropout who taught us dog surgery, and he taught the great Blaylock how to do the first heart operation.
He was a what surgeon?
In the dog lab.
He worked as a dog lab technician,
who taught all the medical students how to operate.
His name was Vivian.
We never knew his last name.
Vivian.
Now Hopkins has a big portrait of him in the big hall.
He was given an honorary degree or something.
Vivian.
That's it.
And he was the best surgeon.
Everybody had that.
Technically, in other words.
He had good judgment, good technique.
The point of it is you can train up.
You know, you can train up... The manual skills can be perfect.
You can train up every skill.
You don't need doctors.
And unless... What the doctor does, which is special, is engage the total situation.
Engage not an organ, but a human being.
And that requires wisdom.
It requires knowledge.
It requires enormous experience.
It requires you to have...
a capacity to engage in gestalting of what is going on.
Well, did doctors do this once upon a time, and they don't do it now?
So what happened?
Where did we go?
Where did we lose our way?
We lost our way sometimes, and you can't put a finger on it.
It was a process, and it was a process that occurred at a gallop beginning in the 1960s.
and has been rapidly progressing in the sense that many factors conjoined to do that.
One is the enormous burgeoning technology, and the fact that the doctor could now look at a heart and see valves in motion.
What the hell do you have to put a stethoscope on the heart where you can see that?
Except that looking at the valve by that costs $800, and putting your stethoscope on the chest costs nothing almost.
Okay?
You see, the technology is one answer.
Another answer was the rewards of the system.
When I spend an hour with a patient, I make $60, $80 for Medicare.
But if I take that patient and put in a pacemaker, I'll get $1,000.
It'll take me less time.
If you do an angioplasty, you'll get $2,000.
For the same hour.
So, hey, the doctor isn't stupid.
Do you think this is influencing decisions?
Of course it is.
I mean, you... You're the guy saying, I don't want to make two friends.
You're a boy scout.
I mean, you're so naive, I can't get over it that you live in this country.
You know, if you look at... I'd like to think a doctor is going to do its best for you.
No, no way.
No way.
I mean, the point is this.
A doctor will consider what is best for you, but subtly and profoundly be influenced what is best for him.
And that is what is the tragedy that is happening now.
And the public detects that.
You talk to ordinary American people.
When I said they're lost out of healing, people said, what a title!
It's so great!
They immediately knew what I was talking about.
All they did is this.
And I've tried it a hundred times now with people.
I said, I wrote a book.
What is
The Lost Heart of Healing.
Great title.
It's very appropriate.
It's a timely book.
I'm glad you wrote it.
The point of it is doctors... Look, in 1982, in 1982, doctorate income, cardiologist income, was $125,000 a year.
In 1989, it was $225,000 a year.
They gained $100,000 in seven years.
How so?
They began to do angioplasty.
They do angioplasty on everybody.
Look, if you look at angioplasty, there is no double-blinded study that says that this prolongs life.
There is none.
Why do you do it if there's no life prolongation?
Oh, we relieve angina, but angina is not a big problem.
You have effective medication that control it very well.
So why would the doctor do that?
Catherizations.
There are a million catheterizations a year.
200,000 of them find normal hearts.
200,000 normal hearts.
One in five.
Look, you sit with me one day.
I was at the meeting.
No, at the party.
Ten years ago.
One of the editors at New England Journal of Medicine was there.
and an editor of the Lancet, one of the leading journals in a very distinguished company.
And I was pontificating this way.
And this guy from New England Journal says, couldn't be, I don't believe you.
I said, Drummond, make rounds with me.
Anytime.
Don't tell me when, so I couldn't set up.
I forgot about it.
A month later, in the middle of a Wednesday, he shows up, so I come to make rounds.
When we got around the rounds, he was horrid.
He says, you're more than right.
You're more than right.
Because what I see is patients... I'll give you a current example.
Last week, I see a 39-year-old man from Austin, Texas.
He developed chest pain.
Okay?
So he went to his doctor.
His doctor said, all this chest pain is suspicious.
Why don't we take a cardiogram?
He took an electrocardiogram.
It was normal.
He said, but I'm still worried.
We'll do an exercise stress test.
He said, the exercise stress test was not positive, but it wasn't negative.
So let's do a thallium, a thallium test.
This is all down in Texas, then?
Yeah.
So that's $2,000.
Did a thallium test.
Nearly normal.
He says, well, it's too difficult a problem since you.
Your mother died suddenly in Mexico.
He's a Mexican-American.
When she was only 50, you having this chest pain, we better solve the problem.
Have a coronary angiogram.
$10,000.
$12,000.
Now, when I added up his bills, it's $20,000.
Okay, we're up to $20,000.
At that point, the chest pain continues.
They found nothing.
And the chest pain is driving him bananas, and he has a responsible position as an executive.
And he goes around, and somebody says, see Lowen in Boston.
So the poor guy flies to Boston, stays in a hotel, gets in.
I see him.
I say, point with your finger where the pain is.
So he goes like that.
I know that's not the chest.
Well, wait a minute.
You don't point with angina.
Angina is sort of a tight fullness.
You never do that.
You do this, you do that, but you don't point.
I say, would you move side to side?
Does that make the pain worse?
Oh, yes, it does.
No, no, no.
I mean, there's two questions.
Then I go in and I feel, and it jumps off the table.
The whole interspaces system has an intercostal inflammation of a nerve.
It's nothing.
Now, wait a minute.
I'm pinning you down, man.
I'm pinning you down.
Why didn't the doctor take a history?
Because doctors don't take histories.
They don't do it anymore.
Well, they do that, but it's cursory.
It's cursory because you're pressured.
You know, you're pressured in HMOs.
You have 15, 20 minutes for a patient to listen to this.
You have 30 minutes for a new patient.
And you go in there, and you're really not well trained to listen.
Medical school doesn't train you to listen.
Why would you train to listen?
Did it ever train you to listen?
Of course you did.
That's what I was trained to do.
So this is what?
To say gone is categoric and wrong.
It's diminished.
It's less emphasis.
Because the dazzling technology, the dazzling beauty of it, and it is beautiful,
If you look at the heart, and you can see the heartbeat, and you can see the blood flow, and you can see the valves moving.
It's almost miraculous.
It's miraculous.
Why should I listen to that old jerk talk at him, wasting my time, and I don't earn a living out of that when I can have a look at his heart and see it all, forget it.
But as I point out in the book, the patient who comes with a chief complaint
You know, the chief complaint may have nothing to do with what's going on.
The chief complaint is an admission ticket.
You know, how many times the patient says, I say, what brings you here?
Well, I have a pain in my left shoulder, or my hatus ernea is bothering me, or crap like that.
And then I take a history, and we talk a little bit,
And I realized that this woman, or this man, had a terrible tragedy.
They lost a maid, or his son had a brain tumor, or got killed in a car accident, or a child is on drugs, or whatnot, anything.
And when we talk about it, and I then go back, I say, let's talk about your brositis, or forget it, doctor, it doesn't bother me.
This happens to me.
at the time.
What do you mean it doesn't bother me?
The cheap complaint is nothing compared to that.
And you know, the moment you have something hurting you deep in your soul, your threshold for somatic pain is reduced.
You're much more prone to experience pain.
You're much more prone to have insomnia.
You're much more prone to have disturbance in eating and bowel function and all that.
And the
The great thing about this book is that it deals with least questions.
Well, you tell the story about the man the pharmacist stuck up on the third floor of his house.
Right, right.
And, I mean, they forced that poor man into thinking he had anxiety.
He was terrified to eat, even.
Right, right.
Unfortunately, in that particular story, he went back to the same thing.
But he didn't live long after that.
Yesterday, I was interviewed by a fellow who was a medical writer for the Children's Hospital.
He wrote books for them.
He wrote Encyclopedia of Health for Children.
He read this book, and he had little paper hanging out, the book, and he had at least 500.
He says, this is a classic.
There's nothing like an American medicine.
I know the field very well.
He was a very articulate guy, and he sort of read...
He says, when I read the chapter of Dining, he said, I'm not an emotional guy.
I was crying.
So this actually was a ten-year project.
Yeah, it was.
Where do you weigh in on this?
Does it actually, is it germane at all, but we see all this Jack Cavortian stuff out in Michigan.
I mean, is this a sign of our times, too, that people are so frustrated?
Well, I mean, this is another aspect.
That they're ready to go and find, to take death.
I mean, it is dreadful because— For a man who's never treated a patient in his life.
Right.
It is dreadful because, in effect, that doctors have the capacity to prolong the act of dying.
And the act of dying should not be prolonged.
Living should be prolonged, not dying.
And if you read the chapter on death and dying, I think that's the best chapter, the most poetic of the chapters, and moving, because I deal with all my experiences with death, including my mother.
But you see, Karabokyan, you're quite right, he's about a small emblematic of what's going on.
You know, why isn't Kevokian ever found guilty?
By juries.
You know why?
Because the public out there is disenchanted with the medical professionals I've been maintaining.
The medical professionals, as Kevokian is engaging in crime, the Justice Department says he's engaging in crime, they bring him in for trial and the people say he's not guilty.
Because they know from their aunt who died, their mother was there with IVs running, with intratracheal tubes, with catheters out of the bladder, with a doctor pumping in drugs to have dead people day after day after day after day that going on.
For what?
Where's the person who has the moral courage to say no?
Hey.
So where do you stand on this?
Where do I stand on the issue?
I am vehemently opposed to doctors practicing euthanasia because I don't trust the medical profession.
But on the other hand, how about doctors, I'm not sure it happens all the time, allowing people to go off.
Oh, that's something else.
That's something else.
I think that, for example, I've had recently a patient
I took care for 10 years, and then he shows up with acute malignant leukemia as a year to move.
And he's feeling quite well.
He's a very successful lawyer.
And he's crying a bit, because he doesn't want chemotherapy, because chemotherapy may give him six months of life.
But he says, I must go through with it.
I said, why?
Well, the doctor says, I have no option.
I have no option, because otherwise, you know, terrible.
I said, you do have an option.
And we sat and talked.
I said, why don't you write a, what do you call it, a will, a living will?
A living will.
He says, he is a lawyer.
You know, I say, living will.
So we sat and composed one.
And he said, you know, I've had a good life.
I have a lovely family.
And I want them to remember me alive, not as a dying wretch with loss of hair.
And with no chance at survival.
With minimal chance.
And then he wrote me a beautiful letter.
How much I help him.
Say no to chemotherapy.
End his days.
All of us are going to
You're going to die.
I'm going to die.
You're all going to die.
We all know that.
We all know that, but we all deny that.
We think life is forever.
And Norman Cousins, you know, the essayist.
He wrote a book on it.
He said once to me, I wrote the introduction to one of his books.
I didn't know that.
I wrote a preface to his book on dealing with a
his own coronary heart attack that was a bestseller.
I think he sold 200,000 copies of it or more.
But he says, Americans think they're going to live forever until they get a cold, and they think they're going to be dead within the hour.
It's amazing.
It's quite an eloquent book that you take, and I do like the fact that I started it
without any prior knowledge of what you were doing.
And I thought the fact that you used these stories really animated it, gave it a life.
You're right.
It gave it this sparkle of reality.
And people would come up to me, it's so real, it's so real.
I just had a person write me a letter.
It surprised me.
I knew her remotely.
She says, I picked it up with a labor day, and I had so many chores.
I began to read it.
I did nothing for the next two days until I finished it.
Is it in the bookstores now?
Yeah, because it's in the bookstores.
The pub date's the 30th of September.
Yeah, it's just in the bookstore, beginning in this area.
I had a call from Texas saying, hey, where's your book?
I've got to find it.
This is.
What's the printing on it?
Do you know offhand?
I have no idea.
But it's a bestseller in the booksmith next to our office.
So patients come in and see the book and the secretary say, where can I get the book?
They say, next door, you know, across the schoolage corner.
So if you judge by that, it's a smashing success.
Well, no, plus you write it at a point in your life
I mean, you're semi-retired, I gather.
I'm not retired at all.
You're not retired at all.
How come they call you emeritus?
Emeritus retired from academics.
But I retired because I'm engaged in so many other things.
I'll give you some literature of another project called Satellite, which I started, which is a big enterprise now.
I have my own satellite in this space.
that are flying around the poles.
What do you mean, your own?
I mean, own.
I'm joking.
But my group, the group of which I am CEO, is a non-profit.
I get no salary.
I get nothing.
And I started in 1985 to promote health communication with a developing world.
Because the big gap in the world today, in my mind, is one that will destroy this world.
in the 21st century.
And that is the enormous widening gulf between the North and the South.
80% of the people of the world earn 1.7%.
20% of the people earn 80% of the world.
And the biggest gap is information.
And I believe information is the most powerful level of extra debt.
and information they don't have.
So by, and I thought very deeply about it, and what stimulated me was Reagan and the Star War madness.
So I launched a program which I initially called Star Health to utilize space-launched satellites for health communication.
And lo and behold, after struggling hard in 1989, I succeeded in some money
And in 1991, our first satellite was launched.
So you actually do it.
OEDA Group does own its own satellites.
Yeah, in 1993, our second one was launched.
And now we have about 30 countries who are part of this.
So it's an interesting paradox, isn't it?
On the one hand, you celebrate this unbelievable technology that allows you to look at a heart beating in Africa or someplace.
Right.
and then maybe you can help this person from here.
That's remarkable and that's wonderful.
But on the other hand...